Improved unbonding feature (#93)
autonity/docs.autonity.org: content/docs/concepts/staking/_index.md

- Transfer: the holder can transfer ownership by sending to another network participant.
  - Upon receipt of liquid newton the holder becomes a delegator to the associated validator, and has a claim to some staked newton.
- Redemption by unbonding: the holder can unbond stake from a validator and redeem for Newton stake token at any time subject to the unbonding period set for the chain. On unbonding:

>   - Liquid Newton is locked then burned for [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake unbonding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Liquid Newton is locked, then burned at epoch end for [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake unbonding
```

By self-bonding stake, a validator puts "skin in the game" because this constitutes a public commitment to the operational integrity of the validator node by its operator. Potential stake delegators can use the amount of self-bonded stake of a validator as a decision factor when conducting due diligence before staking.
{{% /alert %}}

## Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)

> Autonity implements a [_penalty absorbing stake (PAS)_](/glossary/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model where validator [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) stake is slashed in priority to [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake when applying [slashing penalties](/glossary/#slashing-penalty) for accountability events.

Reviewer 2: I would prefer "before" or "ahead of":

```suggestion
Autonity implements a [_penalty absorbing stake (PAS)_](/glossary/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model where validator [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) stake is slashed before [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake when applying [slashing penalties](/glossary/#slashing-penalty) for accountability events.
```

Alternatively one could rework this with the phrase "prioritized over" for example.

Slashing priority is simply:

- [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) stake is slashed as first priority until exhausted. If the validator has self-unbonding stake, then the unbonding stake is slashed first before bonded stake.

> - [delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake is slashed as second priority when the slashing amount exceeds the amount of self-bonded stake available. If the delegator has unbonding stake, then the unbonding stake and bonded stake are slashed _pro rata_ with equal priority.

Reviewer 2: Fixing the case, because these are sentences:

```suggestion
- [Self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded) stake is slashed as first priority until exhausted. If the validator has self-unbonding stake, then the unbonding stake is slashed first before bonded stake.
- [Delegated](/glossary/#delegated) stake is slashed as second priority when the slashing amount exceeds the amount of self-bonded stake available. If the delegator has unbonding stake, then the unbonding stake and bonded stake are slashed _pro rata_ with equal priority.
```

## Staking transitions

Staking transitions are changes to stake bonded to validators caused by:

- stake bonding and unbonding operations submitted by stake delegators

> - [slashing](/concepts/staking/#slashing) penalties applied by protocol for proven validator faults whilst a member of the consensus committee. 

Reviewer: not sure I would consider slashing a staking transition (even though it reduces the bonded stake)

Author: I see the point.  I've re-read this and agree it's inconsistent with other sections in the Concept page as well.

I've reworded to remove this and edit - see commit 9652dc7fe7d62791ddd7958be06083fe8f9a320e

Bonding and unbonding requests submitted during an epoch are processed and committed to state in the next available block, but the effect of such staking transitions is only applied at epoch end. Until epoch end staking transitions are maintained in memory in `BondingRequest` and `UnbondingRequest` data structures. They can be read by listening for and viewing `NewBondingRequest` and `NewUnbondingRequest` events emitted by the [`bond()`](/reference/api/aut/#bond) and [`unbond()`](/reference/api/aut/#unbond) functions of the Autonity Protocol Contract.

In Autonity's AFD protocol, slashable faults are likewise processed throughout an epoch and any staking transitions caused by stake slashing are applied to unbonding and bonded stake at epoch end according to Autonity's [Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)](/concepts/staking/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model. i.e. self-bonded stake is slashed in priority to delegated stake. 

> As noted in [Protocol assets](/concepts/protocol-assets/), Newton and Liquid Newton token can be in different states. Bonded and unbonding stake is liable to protocol application of [slashing](/concepts/staking/#slashing) penalties:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As noted in [Protocol assets](/concepts/protocol-assets/), Newton and Liquid Newton token can be in different states. Bonded and unbonding stake is liable to [slashing](/concepts/staking/#slashing) penalties:
```

- Newton whilst locked in [states](/concepts/protocol-assets/newton/) `bonded` and `unbonding`.
- Liquid Newton in [states](/concepts/protocol-assets/liquid-newton/) `locked` and `unlocked`.

Whilst stake is unbonding the protocol tracks the relative ownership of stake in the delegated and self-bonded unbonding pools via a "share" mechanism so that the PAS slashing priority may be correctly applied to the unbonding stake and the correct amount of delegated or self-bonded stake be released at the end of the unbonding period.

{{< alert title="Info" >}}

> Metadata stating the unbonding pools and tracking "shares" amounts are returned as part of the response when querying for a validator. See the [`getValidator()`](/reference/api/aut/#getvalidator) response object which contains fields for:

Reviewer: The info in the validator object provides the total amount of shares and unbonding stake, however the single shares for each unbonding request are stored in the `UnbondingRequest` object

Author: Yes, that's covered in the paragraph preceding this note at Line 207:

But it could be clearer here. I will edit the Info note and reword to add this.

Author: See commit d80e806

- Delegated stake unbonding pool: `unbondingStake` and `unbondingShares`
- Self-bonded unbonding pool: `selfUnbondingStake` and `selfUnbondingShares`.
{{< /alert >}}

### Bonding

> Stake token is bonded to an active validator through a bonding operation. Once bonded stake token is locked and cannot be transferred to other stakeholders. If bonded stake token belongs to the validator then it is [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded), otherwise the token is [delegated](/glossary/#delegated). The [voting power](/glossary/#voting-power) of a validator is determined by the amount of stake bonded to it. 

Reviewer: I think diagrams for:
- bonding flow
- unbonding flow

would help a lot users to understand here.

Not necessary for release though.

Author: Absolute. I've created an issue covering this and for _other_ Concepts, too here: https://github.com/autonity/docs.autonity.org/issues/104

The duration of the unbonding period is set at genesis by the `unbondingPeriod` parameter, see the [Protocol](/reference/protocol) parameter reference. The setting can be changed by governance calling the [`setUnbondingPeriod()`](/reference/api/aut/op-prot/#setunbondingperiod) function.

{{< alert title="Example" >}}

> In an unbonding scenario with an epoch period of 30 blocks, an unbonding period of 120 blocks, and an unbonding request issued at block 15 in the epoch. At block 15 the unbonding request is processed and then tracked in memory. At the end of that epoch, block 30, the validator's voting power is reduced and the unbonded amount is added to the unbonding pool. The unbonding period expires at block 135. At the end of the epoch in which the unbonding period falls, block 150, due Newton is returned to the stake delegator.

Reviewer 2: "due Newton" doesn't sound right:

```suggestion
In an unbonding scenario with an epoch period of 30 blocks, an unbonding period of 120 blocks, and an unbonding request issued at block 15 in the epoch. At block 15 the unbonding request is processed and then tracked in memory. At the end of that epoch, block 30, the validator's voting power is reduced and the unbonded amount is added to the unbonding pool. The unbonding period expires at block 135. At the end of the epoch in which the unbonding period falls, block 150, the Newton that is due is returned to the stake delegator.
```

Stake remains at risk during the unbonding period. The amount of Newton returned to the delegator may be less than the original unbonded amount if the validator has been slashed between submitting the unbond request at block 15 and Newton redemption at block 150.
{{< /alert >}}

## Staking transitions

Staking transitions are changes to stake bonded to validators caused by:

> - stake bonding and unbonding operations submitted by stake delegators 

Reviewer 2: I can't think of a situation where we would need to create a bullet list with only a single item. This can be just folded into a paragraph:

```suggestion
Staking transitions are changes to stake bonded to validators caused by stake bonding and unbonding operations submitted by stake delegators.
```

> Bonding and unbonding requests submitted during an epoch are processed and committed to state in the next available block, but the effect of such staking transitions is only applied at epoch end. Until epoch end staking transitions are maintained in memory in `BondingRequest` and `UnbondingRequest` data structures. They can be read by listening for and viewing `NewBondingRequest` and `NewUnbondingRequest` events emitted by the [`bond()`](/reference/api/aut/#bond) and [`unbond()`](/reference/api/aut/#unbond) functions of the Autonity Protocol Contract.

Reviewer 2: missing comma

```suggestion
Bonding and unbonding requests submitted during an epoch are processed and committed to state in the next available block, but the effect of such staking transitions is only applied at epoch end. Until epoch end, staking transitions are maintained in memory in `BondingRequest` and `UnbondingRequest` data structures. They can be read by listening for and viewing `NewBondingRequest` and `NewUnbondingRequest` events emitted by the [`bond()`](/reference/api/aut/#bond) and [`unbond()`](/reference/api/aut/#unbond) functions of the Autonity Protocol Contract.
```

> In Autonity's [AFD](/concepts/accountability/) protocol, slashable faults are likewise processed throughout an epoch and any changes to delegated stake caused by stake slashing are applied to unbonding and bonded stake at epoch end according to Autonity's [Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)](/concepts/staking/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model before staking transitions are applied. 

Reviewer 2: A real mouthful, break it up with commas and sentences to aid readability:

```suggestion
In Autonity's [AFD](/concepts/accountability/) protocol, slashable faults are likewise processed throughout an epoch. Any changes to delegated stake that are caused by stake slashing are applied to unbonding and bonded stake at the epoch end according to Autonity's [Penalty-Absorbing Stake (PAS)](/concepts/staking/#penalty-absorbing-stake-pas) model. This takes place before staking transitions are applied. 
```

As noted in [Protocol assets](/concepts/protocol-assets/), Newton and Liquid Newton token can be in different states. Bonded and unbonding stake is liable to [slashing](/concepts/staking/#slashing) penalties:

- Newton whilst locked in [states](/concepts/protocol-assets/newton/) `bonded` and `unbonding`.

> - Liquid Newton in [states](/concepts/protocol-assets/liquid-newton/) `locked` and `unlocked`.

Reviewer 2: These aren't complete sentences, but rather sentence fragments, and so the period at the end is not appropriate:

```suggestion
- Newton whilst locked in [states](/concepts/protocol-assets/newton/) `bonded` and `unbonding`
- Liquid Newton in [states](/concepts/protocol-assets/liquid-newton/) `locked` and `unlocked`
```

That they start with a capital letter is orthogonal, because the capital letter is due to the use of a proper noun and not indicative of being a full sentence.

> Whilst stake is unbonding the protocol tracks the relative ownership of stake in the delegated and self-bonded unbonding pools via a "share" mechanism so that the PAS slashing priority may be correctly applied to the unbonding stake and the correct amount of delegated or self-bonded stake be released at the end of the unbonding period.

Reviewer 2: Another mouthful, break it up and make it more readable with commas:

```suggestion
Whilst stake is unbonding, the protocol tracks the relative ownership of stake in the delegated and self-bonded unbonding pools via a "share" mechanism, so that the PAS slashing priority may be correctly applied to the unbonding stake, and the correct amount of delegated or self-bonded stake may be released at the end of the unbonding period.
```

{{< alert title="Info" >}}
Metadata providing the total amount of shares and unbonding stake is returned as part of the response when querying for a validator. See the [`getValidator()`](/reference/api/aut/#getvalidator) response object which contains fields for:

- Delegated stake unbonding pool: `unbondingStake` and `unbondingShares`

> - Self-bonded unbonding pool: `selfUnbondingStake` and `selfUnbondingShares`.

Reviewer 2: Capitalization and periods not appropriate because these aren't sentences, and they don't start with proper nouns either:

```suggestion
- delegated stake unbonding pool: `unbondingStake` and `unbondingShares`
- self-bonded unbonding pool: `selfUnbondingStake` and `selfUnbondingShares`
```

The shares and unbonding stake amounts for each unbonding request are stored in the `UnbondingRequest` object. See the `NewUnbondingRequest` event emitted by the [`unbond()`](/reference/api/aut/#unbond) for the object fields.
{{< /alert >}}

### Bonding

> Stake token is bonded to an active validator through a bonding operation. Once bonded stake token is locked and cannot be transferred to other stakeholders. If bonded stake token belongs to the validator then it is [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded), otherwise the token is [delegated](/glossary/#delegated). The [voting power](/glossary/#voting-power) of a validator is determined by the amount of stake bonded to it. 

Reviewer 2: Comma is absolutely required, otherwise the reader may to re-read the sentence to disambiguate:

```suggestion
Stake token is bonded to an active validator through a bonding operation. Once bonded, stake token is locked and cannot be transferred to other stakeholders. If bonded stake token belongs to the validator then it is [self-bonded](/glossary/#self-bonded), otherwise the token is [delegated](/glossary/#delegated). The [voting power](/glossary/#voting-power) of a validator is determined by the amount of stake bonded to it. 
```

Stake is unbonded from a validator through an unbonding operation. Unbonding is subject to an [unbonding period](/concepts/staking/#unbondingperiod) during which it remains locked. The unbonding period applies irrespective of whether the nominated validator is a member of the consensus committee or not. 

> Unbonding is triggered by a staker submitting an `unbond()` transaction. Unbonding can begin as soon as the unbond transaction request has been finalized. On processing the transaction the bonded stake token moves from `bonded` to the intermediate state of `unbonding`. The stake is still locked during the unbonding period. The unbonding request is captured and tracked in memory and the staking transition is applied at the end of the epoch in which the unbonding period expires: unbonding is applied, reducing the validator’s bonded stake amount and so applying the voting power change to the validator.

Reviewer: > The unbonding request is captured and tracked in memory and the staking transition is applied **at the end of the epoch in which the unbonding period expires**: unbonding is applied, reducing the validator’s bonded stake amount and so applying the voting power change to the validator.

The bondedStake (and consequently the voting power) decreases when `_applyUnbonding` is executed, which is at the end of the epoch in which the unbonding request was issued.

The NTN are then released only at the end of the unbonding period

Author: Good catch, thanks.  Corrected and reworded in commit 79e8128.

Author: And in the API Reference Autonity Contract Interface for `unbond()` in commit a7ccaca.

{{< alert title="Example" >}}

> Alice sends an `unbond()` tx at time `T`, a block in an epoch. The tx is processed at `T` and an `UnbondingRequest` object for the necessary voting power change is created. At `T+1` the [unbonding period](/glossary/#unbonding-period) begins.

Reviewer: I think this example does not match the code. The steps should be:
1. unbonding request is issued (LNTN locked if non self bonded)
2. at the end of the epoch (LNTN burned), stake goes into unbonding state (not counted anymore as voting power) and shares are issued. unbonding stake can still be slashed
3. at the end of the unbonding period, shares are converted into NTNs and returned to the "unbonder"

Also I think that it is better to refer to all operation timings in terms of blocks and epochs, rather than actual times

Author: Corrected in commit 79e8128.

- _on expiry of the unbonding period_: NTN for the unbonding stake amount are released to the delegator at the end of the unbonding period.

{{< alert title="Example" >}}
Alice sends an `unbond()` tx at time `T`, a block in an epoch. The tx is processed at `T` and an `UnbondingRequest` object for the necessary voting power change is created. At `T+1` the [unbonding period](/glossary/#unbonding-period) begins.

The unbonding request is tracked in memory for application and:

- at the end of the epoch in which `T` was processed the validator's bonded stake amount and voting power is reduced:
  - the designated amount of Liquid Newton amount is unlocked and burnt if the stake being unbonded is [delegated](/glossary/#delegated),
  - the amount of stake to reduce the unbonding pool by and Alice's share of the unbonding pool is calculated,
  - the amount of Newton bonded to the validator is reduced by the unbonding amount, consequently reducing the validator's voting power.

> - on expiry of the unbonding period (`T+1` + `unbonding period`) Newton redemption (i.e. 'release') occurs when at that block height:

Reviewer: To be more exact it is at the first epoch that ends after  `T+1` + `unbonding period`

Author: Thanks @lorenzo-dev1 ! Edited here and elsewhere in commit 320685b950e4b178702e6c910f34903c11e101f5.

Stake is unbonded from a validator through an unbonding operation. Unbonding is subject to an [unbonding period](/concepts/staking/#unbondingperiod) during which it remains locked. The unbonding period applies irrespective of whether the nominated validator is a member of the consensus committee or not. 

> Unbonding is triggered by a staker submitting an `unbond()` transaction. Unbonding can begin as soon as the unbond transaction request has been finalized. On processing the transaction the bonded stake token moves from `bonded` to the intermediate state of `unbonding`. The stake is still locked during the unbonding period. The unbonding request is captured and tracked in memory. The staking transition is applied in two steps:

Reviewer 2: Comma for readability:

```suggestion
Unbonding is triggered by a staker submitting an `unbond()` transaction. Unbonding can begin as soon as the unbond transaction request has been finalized. On processing the transaction, the bonded stake token moves from `bonded` to the intermediate state of `unbonding`. The stake is still locked during the unbonding period. The unbonding request is captured and tracked in memory. The staking transition is applied in two steps:
```

- _at the end of the epoch in which the unbonding request was issued_: the validator's total bonded stake (and consequently [voting power](/glossary/#voting-power) decreases by the unbonded amount when the unbonding is applied at the end of the epoch,

> - _at the end of the epoch in which the unbonding period expires_: NTN for the unbonding stake amount are released to the delegator.

Reviewer 2: End of line punctuation:

```suggestion
- _at the end of the epoch in which the unbonding request was issued_: the validator's total bonded stake (and consequently [voting power](/glossary/#voting-power) decreases by the unbonded amount when the unbonding is applied at the end of the epoch

- _at the end of the epoch in which the unbonding period expires_: NTN for the unbonding stake amount are released to the delegator
```

{{< alert title="Example" >}}

> Alice sends an `unbond()` tx at time `T`, a block in an epoch. The tx is processed at `T` and an `UnbondingRequest` object for the necessary voting power change is created. At `T+1` the [unbonding period](/glossary/#unbonding-period) begins.

Reviewer 2: It is not very realistic that tx submitted at `T` will be processed at `T`, and I don't think the submission time bears a lot of relevance here, so it is not worth pointing because it is unnecessary information AFAIK:

```suggestion
Alice submits an `unbond()` tx that is processed and included in a block at time `T`, where an `UnbondingRequest` object for the necessary voting power change is also created. At `T+1`, the [unbonding period](/glossary/#unbonding-period) begins.
```

The unbonding request is tracked in memory for application and at the end of the epoch:

- in which `T` was processed the validator's bonded stake amount and voting power is reduced:
  - the designated amount of Liquid Newton amount is unlocked and burnt if the stake being unbonded is [delegated](/glossary/#delegated),
  - the amount of stake to reduce the unbonding pool by and Alice's share of the unbonding pool is calculated,
  - the amount of Newton bonded to the validator is reduced by the unbonding amount, consequently reducing the validator's voting power.

- in which the unbonding period (`T+1` + `unbonding period`) expires Newton redemption (i.e. 'release') occurs:
  - due Newton is minted to Alice's Newton account.

> Note that the amount of Newton released to Alice may be less than the original unbonded amount if the validator has been slashed between `T` and the end of the epoch in which the `unbonding period` expires.

Reviewer 2: There is no need for nesting lists here. It is simple to re-write in order to avoid a nested list:

```suggestion
The unbonding request is tracked in memory for application at the end of the epoch in which `T` was processed, when the validator's bonded stake amount and voting power is reduced as follows:
  - the designated amount of Liquid Newton amount is unlocked and burnt if the stake being unbonded is [delegated](/glossary/#delegated)
  - the amount of stake to reduce the unbonding pool by and Alice's share of the unbonding pool is calculated
  - the amount of Newton bonded to the validator is reduced by the unbonding amount, consequently reducing the validator's voting power

Then, at the end of the epoch in which the unbonding period (`T+1` + `unbonding period`) expires, Newton redemption (i.e. 'release') occurs and the Newton that is due is minted to Alice's Newton account.

Note that the amount of Newton released to Alice may be less than the original unbonded amount if the validator has been slashed between `T` and the end of the epoch in which the `unbonding period` expires.
```
